GEOFF BENNETT: In a recent report,
Judy Woodruff examined how the loss of
thousands of local newspapers across
the country is depriving communities of
some of the glue that holds them together.
Tonight, she looks at how some news outlets
are managing to hang on, and whether what
they're doing is sustainable. It's part of
her ongoing series America at a Crossroads.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just after dawn most Thursdays,
Anne Adams takes to the winding mountain roads of
Western Virginia, delivering a local newspaper,
The Recorder, to small stores and coffee shops.
ANNE ADAMS, Editor and Publisher,
The Recorder: I will set one aside
when I get back over to the office.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But Adams isn't just the
delivery person. She is also the owner,
editor and publisher of this
paper that covers three counties,
including two of the most
sparsely populated in the state.
And like many local news editors, she's
closely connected to the community.
ANNE ADAMS: Folks need to know what's
going on. They need to know their
neighbors. They need to know what what's
happening, how their money is being spent.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The paper's Highland County
office is nestled in the midst of the Allegheny
Mountains in Monterey, Virginia, a small
one-stoplight town of about 160 residents.
Adams says people in this tight-knit
community not only suggest story ideas,
but also hold her to account.
ANNE ADAMS: You can be shopping, and dropping
the kids off at school, and they're like,
we think you crossed the line there or
not sure that was the right way to put it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For much of the country's history,
local newspapers played a key role in uniting
communities, highlighting common challenges and
events that tie people together, like high
school sports and local political races.
ANNE ADAMS: We have always had a really good
-- got a grapevine gossip network here. But,
well, we will dig into it and
find out what's really going on,
what's really happening and report
that. And then it settles down.
Without a newspaper to do that, I just
feel like folks would not have the
right information. I think they would be less
engaged, less apt to vote, less apt to care.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But that's become the
reality for many Americans over the
last two decades. About 2,500 local
newspapers, a quarter of the total,
have folded since 2005, according to Northwestern
University's Medill School of Journalism.
In that same period, newspaper revenue
has plunged from $50 billion to 20
billion. News organizations that have
been able to survive are operating on
razor-thin margins. One-fifth of U.S.
residents now live in news deserts,
where residents have very limited access to
credible and comprehensive news and information.
ANNE ADAMS: So they did
scrub a times past look-back,
even in the '30s. And that's a
feature that we still publish today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That you still do today.
ANNE ADAMS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Adams, who is only the 10th
publisher of the paper, took over in 2007.
ANNE ADAMS: But look at these tiny little
headlines. Graphic designers today would go crazy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Recorder has helped
hold this community with its long,
proud history together for 146 years.
It's done so mainly by selling ads and
subscriptions at a time when so many local
newspapers across the country have collapsed.
But it may not be financially
sustainable in the long run.
ANNE ADAMS: The cost of printing has gone up. The
cost of paper has gone up. The
cost of postage has gone up.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, can you venture a guess,
an educated guess as to how long
you can keep this model going?
ANNE ADAMS: Well, as long as I'm alive
and doing this. I mean, I always say,
we're not going to kill it off on my
watch. We will do whatever we have to do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In 2017, Adams gambled and
more than doubled the newsstand price from
$2 to $5. And it was just five issues
away from folding during the pandemic,
when its readers stepped in with donations
to keep the printing presses going.
All this has paid off, most visibly
in The Recorder breaking the news in
2014 of the proposed Atlantic Coast
Pipeline, a 600-mile natural gas line
that would have cut through three states and
potentially had huge environmental impacts.
ANNE ADAMS: I remember everybody kept saying,
why are you bothering? You can't fight
a company like Dominion,
especially not in Virginia.
We just kept hammering away at them.
And we got the privilege of being the
first to report when they shut the project down.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But many local newspapers lack the
manpower to do that kind of reporting.
Newsroom employment has been slashed
by 60 percent since 2005, turning many
small publications into ghost newspapers.
In Jackson, Mississippi, staff at The
Clarion-Ledger, owned by the Gannett chain,
has suffered repeated rounds
of cuts in the last 15 years.
MARY MARGARET WHITE, CEO,
Mississippi Today: And there
really was just a lack of Statehouse reporting.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mary Margaret White
is the CEO of Mississippi Today,
a nonprofit digital news source launched
in 2016 that's run by donations and grants.
MARY MARGARET WHITE: Some big issues
were coming through the legislature,
and there was no one there to cover them. And that
was really the early days of Mississippi Today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's become an exemplar of now
rapid growth in these alternative news outlets.
MARY MARGARET WHITE: In early days,
making a case for journalism as
philanthropy was really a long and
hard conversation. It was just so
new to so many people that you would give
philanthropically to the press, to media.
And now six, seven years later,
people are really beginning to understand
the value of journalism to our democracy,
the value of it to local communities, and
that it is a worthwhile cause to support.
Last year, I'm so proud, we
brought in more than $400,000.
JUDY WOODRUFF: My gosh. Wow.
MARY MARGARET WHITE: And
that's from everyday people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mississippi Today publishes the
names of its donors online, and is partially
funded by a venture philanthropy, the American
Journalism Project based in Washington, D.C.
SARABETH BERMAN, CEO, American
Journalism Project: We think
we're at the front end of building a
new generation of news organizations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The project was
established four years ago,
and now helps support 41
newsrooms across the country.
Sarabeth Berman is the CEO.
SARABETH BERMAN: We have seen over the last
several years new digital nonprofit news
organizations that are really fundamentally
reimagining how we finance local news.
We used to use advertising to finance local
news. That has largely disappeared. About
80 percent of advertising revenue has
disappeared in the last two decades. And
these organizations are really thinking
of their financial structure in the same
way we think of other organizations that
are really essential to our communities,
like libraries and museums and other
institutions that stitch us together.
MAN: If you're trying to
register to vote, can't do it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mississippi Today's
reporters cover policy and politics,
which are livelier than usual in
this, a statewide election year.
MAN: Because I want to see our
election system change in our state.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last month, we caught up with their
small team of reporters covering the
candidates at the Neshoba County Fair.
And we spoke with residents
who say they have grown to
rely on Mississippi Today's digital-only platform.
WILL SIMMONS, Mississippi Resident: And
I don't agree with everything they write,
but it is -- I mean, a lot of it
is -- it seems like they're -- it's
just pretty straight facts, a lot of what they do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now one of the
largest newsrooms in the state,
Mississippi Today won a Pulitzer
Prize earlier this year.
Reporter Anna Wolfe's investigation "The
Backchannel" exposed the state's diversion
of millions of federal welfare dollars
intended to help some of the poorest
people in the country instead directed
to political supporters, such as former
football star Brett Favre to build a
volleyball stadium at his alma mater.
ANNA WOLFE, Mississippi Today:
I think I'm probably on that
story up to at least 100 public records requests.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wolfe estimated she worked
on the story on and off for five years.
ANNA WOLFE: So you think about the time that
it takes to draft those and see them through
the process of actually being able
to get your hands on those records,
and people might not realize how long it takes,
and then might not realize the investment
that is required to do that kind of work.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At times, the news outlet's
reporting has angered Republican leadership.
Just last month, former Mississippi
Governor Phil Bryant sued the news outlet,
charging its employees defamed him
in public comments. The lawsuit does
not appear to challenge the veracity of
the reporting. While Mississippi Today
has focused heavily on state House and
investigative reporting, Sarabeth Berman
acknowledges that new nonprofit newsrooms also
need to build up trust in their communities.
SARABETH BERMAN: Mississippi Today, last year
during the Jackson water crisis, was out there
providing people with just the basic tools that
they need to be able to navigate this crisis,
information about how to get water and what to
do if you if you don't have access to good water.
And by providing people with
that kind of information,
you begin to build trust with them that
you are there and you're on their side.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, the nonprofit model
is showing promise in urban settings,
economic realities persist for small local
newspapers that still depend on subscriptions
and advertising, like The Recorder in Virginia.
PENNY ABERNATHY, Northwestern University:
The traditional news model has just vanished.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Northwestern University's Penny
Abernathy has done extensive research on local
journalism. She posits that more than 90 percent
of all news organizations are still commercially
based and news organizations benefiting from
nonprofit dollars are geographically uneven.
PENNY ABERNATHY: It leaves smaller communities
kind of at a loss as to how do you go about
getting that initial ignition that brings
people together and helps them understand
that they can do this, that they can raise
that money to support local news operations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: She says one solution might
be using public dollars to
help local newsrooms survive,
subsidies for hiring reporters and for local
businesses that advertise in the local paper.
PENNY ABERNATHY: There just isn't sufficient
subscriber revenue to pay the bills. And,
of course, there's not sufficient philanthropic
dollars to lift them up over the profit margin.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The challenges ahead are
great, and the stakes are very high.
PENNY ABERNATHY: Increasingly, I'm worried that
we're evolving into a nation of journalistic
haves and have-nots. That has huge implications
for not only our democracy, but for our society.
How do we come together around a common set of
facts to solve the issues that are
confronting us in the 21st century?
JUDY WOODRUFF: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm Judy Woodruff
in Jackson, Mississippi, and Monterey, Virginia.